Here a few notes while developing the ontology. Hope to keep this updated.

Imported from CHEBI: chemical entity(CHEBI_24431), atom (CHEBI_33250), chemical_substance (CHEBI_59999), mixture (CHEBI_60004), pure substance (CHEBI_60003), group (CHEBI_24433), molecular entity (CHEBI_23367), polyatomic entity (CHEBI_36357),molecule (CHEBI_25367), organic molecule (CHEBI_72695 )  



THe ontology is about pharmaceutical product design and development - i.e how to formulate new pharmaceutical products ? From NCI thesaurus: a formulation is "The composition of a dosage form, including the characteristics of its raw materials and the operations required to process it". So the first step of the ontology is to define what are the different dosage forms , what are the different elements in the composition of a pharmaceutical product.

"pharmaceutical dosage form": the form in which active and/or inert ingredient(s) are physically presented (code C42636 in NCI thesaurus). It is a processed material with a clinical drug role (cf DRON_00000001) and has at least one ingrediet/component (pharmaceutical dosage form ingredient) with an active role (active ingredient role) and some ingredient with excipient role . They are various type of pharmaceutical dosage form: tablets, capsules, solutions, gels...they can be classified according to the form in chich the active and/or inert ingredient(s) are marketed for: ex: solid or liquid forms. 
A "pharmaceutical dosage form" is a subclass of processed material, and is equivalent to (has part min 1 active pharmaceutical ingredient) and (has part some pharmaceutical excipient) and (has role some clinical drug role). 
  
Note: Pharmaceutical dosage form si equivalent to "Drug product" used by DRON. In OPHPDD we do not consider the actual marketed, branded, product (ex: Nurofen, Panadol etc... ) - this would be a subclass of the above but this is too granular for the OPHPDD ontology and is considered in DRON. 

Imported from OBI: processed material (OBI_0000047), planned process (OBI_0000011), material processing (OBI_0000094)

Imported from DRON clinical drug role(DRON:00000001), role of scattered molecular aggregate (DRON 00000030), active ingredient (DRON:00000028 renamed active ingredient role), excipient (DRON:00000029 renamed excipient role)

Created class hierarchy for pharmaceutical dosage form, inspired by NCI thesaurus. See difference between liquid and solution. 

Created class hierarchy for different kind of excipient: binders, fillers, coatings etc...according to NCI Thesaurus

Could add class hierarchy for route of administration but not clear how this is relevant for the present ontology.

 See http://drugtopics.modernmedicine.com/drug-topics/news/modernmedicine/modern-medicine-news/overview-pharmaceutical-excipients-used-tablets for excipients list and their roles. Linking some of CHEBI entity to excipients components: tentative link: ex microscristalling cellulose excipient (the actual powder mixed with other tablets ingredients) is a scattered molecular aggregate with has grain molecular entity cellulose (CHEBI:62968) - this should works. 

The FDA is providing an excipient database: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm113978.htm - might be useful to integrate this at a point

Added link between pharmaceutical excipient, active principal ingredient and molecular entity through OBI term : "scattered molecular aggregate" : ex active pharmaceutical aggregate is a scattered molecular aggregate and has role active ingredient role. Added scatter molecular aggregate as a subclass of "chemical entity" (so that they have descriptors as well)...hum might change scatter molecular aggregate to CHEBI chemical substance  - no keep the DRON approach?


Need to define several "level of material entity (=granularity or collective)" - crystal entity, particle entity, powder entity, granule entity as we will have different quality for each of these levels.  
hum after reflexion crystal entity particle entity and powder entity are not scattered molecular aggregate but rather subclass of a "processed material" class. I need to  link back this to scattered molecular aggregate through some property "has solid/liquid form" as we need to model liquid/solid or maybe this is not needed and for each excipient/API we need to define has molecular grain / has particle grain / has crystal grain properties ?

Need to model that a tablet is a mixture of stuff. Intial idea is to create a class "proportion of scatter molecular aggregate", just to modelise proportion but this is not really practical. So decided to create a quality "chemical substance proportion" to be able to define proportion of stuff. This is not really good from an ontological perspective but I have the feeling this will simplify things.  Added RO property "has component". Added scatter molecular aggregate has_quality  chemical substance quality.  
Imported first cheminf terms (chemical quality). Added crystal entity quality, particle entity quality, powder entity quality. Could add those last as subclass of chemical substance (scatter molecular aggregate as well)
Imported cheminf chemical descriptor and manually added some subclasses and properties. Changed "structural descriptor" class from cheminf to own OPHPDD class as I wasn't happy with CHEMINF definition that seems to consider it only for molecule entity.  Used "mass" from PATO. The class "dimensional extent quality" provides also length, radius,  surface, volume etc.


Creating a "pharmaceutical formulation specification" this is a "directive information entity" = analogy to the final pharmaceutical product's recipe. The definition is taken from the NCI Thesaurus code C42638.  The "pharmaceutical formulation specification" "is about" a "pharmaceutical dosage form". Use the standard IAO "is about" property, might be a bit too vague so could potentially define another one in the future. A "pharmaceutical formulation specification" might have several parts or topics: one can think of "pharmaceutical form specification" (is it liquid? solid?), 
"pharmaceutical ingredient specification" (what is the API ? what is the Exciipients ?), "pharmaceutical manufacturing route specification" (what is the main process) .etc...

Adding crystal structural properties. Inspiration from CCDC database. Considering adding "crystal cell lengths descriptor" , "crystal cell angles descriptor", "crystal spacegroup symbol descriptor", "crystal symetry operators descriptor", "crystal symmetry rotation descriptor", "crystal symmetry translation descriptor". Incorporated "cartesian spatial coordinate datum" from IAO. TO include descriptor related to crystal entity added defined class "crystal entity descriptor" (chemical descriptor and is about crystal entity). Same way, added defined class "particle entity descriptor", "granule entity descriptor", "powder entity descriptor" - added an "amorphous entity quality"


#######
#ok start work on pharmaceutical manufacturing
##############
Everything subclass of "material processing" ? They have input and output
Created high-level class "Drug Formulation Process and subclasses" (inspired by NCI thesaurus) 
Created other sub-classes inspired by NCI Thesaurus:
	-Granulation and sub-classes
	-Particle_sizing and sub-classes
	-Mixing and sub-classes
	-Filtration and sub-classes
	-
Modification of the classes: created one class for unit operation and one class for overall pharmaceutical manufacturing processes

created a class pharmaceutical unit operation equipement and added some subclasses

 each unit operation has participant a unit operation equipment

imported "setting datum" from IAO to be able to describe the process parameters and imported "equipment specification datum" from CHMO to describe equipement parameters

 
